NOTES 43

lx

150. ut . . . scribam: as in l. 56. tibi: an alternatim
construction with ad te.

151. quo: with comparatis-es quo is used in final sentences
with the subj. in place os ut. L. G. ἧς 199 μ’, 365. cf. l. 156.

152. Gratia· ago: the indirect object which is not ex-
pressed would be eibi.

158. gloriam: i. e. by your writings.

154. niseni: locutive. classi: dat. after the compound
promat. L. G. 5 118 (b). hors septime: abl. ostime when.

156. Por the construction cf. Ι, 151.

157. cui: dat. ot* possessor. as in l. 136.

158. pinni: dat. aster simillima : cs. ll. 100. 170.

15⁹. in summo trunco: not ⁴ on the highest ’ but ‘at the
top of'3 es. imus ηιοηε, ‘the soot os thr· mountain‘. L. G.
ᾖ 299. Cf. 1. 566, in &themo ,τέκε-ὀ.

160. eandida: in agreement with nubes, l. 157. The cloud
looked white when the volcano poured out ashae, and black
when earth and rocks were hurled out.

162. liburnicam: sc. narem, a light, fast-sailing vessel
used by the Liburni of Illyria and Dalmatia. Notice the
asyndeton, or lack of conjunctionS, to emphasizc the rapid
suecession ot' actions. L. G. ξ 188.

168. mvi: dat. after the compound incidebat.

1⁶4. igne: abl. of instrument. L. G. ξ 120 (c'J.

165. sn se reciperet: the subj. οἱ the indirect question :
cf. 1. 62, lit. ‘whether he should withdraw himsels’, i.e.
retire: cf. French se retiret. Another phrase with the same
meaning is pedem referre.

166. imperat ut: after stupere, us with the subj. is used.
L. G. ἱ 301. Fortes fortuna iuvat: notice the alliteration

in the proverb: the Romans had this proverb in different
forms: sortes sertum ; sor-tuna jaret.

169. lotus: also lautus, refers to the bathe in which the
Romans indulged before dinner. accubat: especially of

reclining at dinner.
X

173. somno: abl. aftersmebatur. L. G. ξ 124.
175. gravior: translate ⁴ rather slow ', or ⁶ short· ; the
comparative is frequently used in Latin in this sense : cf. l.

270.

 

